\section{Conclusion}

This paper shows that the inter-node dependences of a very broad class
of synchronous dataflow graphs can be cleanly represented as a System
of Affine Recurrence Equations.  In combination with Feautrier's array
dataflow analysis~\cite{Feautrier01} for deducing intra-node
dependences, this establishes the SARE as a unified analysis and
optimization framework for high-level DSP programming models.

Our technique inputs a Phased Computation Graph, which we originally
formulated as a model of computation for StreamIt~\cite{streamitcc}.
Phased Computation Graphs are a generalization of synchronous dataflow
graphs, cyclo-static dataflow graphs, and computation graphs; they
also include a novel notion of initial and steady-state epochs, which
are an appealing abstraction for programmers.  To the best of our
knowledge, there is no existing affine dependenence analysis for any
of the dataflow representations listed above.

We believe that the precise affine dependence framework provided by
the SARE representation will enable a powerful suite of node
optimizations in dataflow graphs.  The SARE is a robust and
well-established framework within the systolic and scientific
communities, with methods for graph parameterization, automatic
parallelization, and storage optimization.  We propose optimizations
such as decimation propagation, node fission, and steady-state
invariant code motion that are first applications of these techniques
to the signal processing domain.
