\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}

In this paper, we describe the StreamIt compiler for the Raw
architecture.  The stream graph of a StreamIt program exposes the data
communication pattern to the compiler while the lack of global
synchronization frees the compiler to radically reorganize the program
for efficient execution on the underlying architecture. The StreamIt
compiler demonstrates the power of this flexibility by totally
reorganizing large programs for better load balance. We were able to
map many of programs on to the Raw processor and to obtain good
performance.

We introduce a collection of optimizations--vertical and horizontal
filter fusion, vertical and horizontal filter fission, and filter
reordering--that can be used to restructure stream graphs.  We show
that by applying these transformations we can map a high-level stream
program, written to reflect the composition of the application, onto
Raw and achieve good processor utilization and load balance, leading
to a factor of three speedup on two applications.

Unlike all previous streaming languages, the structured streams of
StreamIt makes it possible for us to approach the optimization and
parallelization problems in a very systematic manner. It enables us to
define multiple optimizations--targeting different constructs and
requirements--and to compose them in a hierarchical manner.

The ability to do global transformations across multiple filters, that
may have originated from very different parts of the application,
makes it possible for the compiler to find optimization opportunities
that may elude even an experienced programmer.  Such capabilities
enable the programmers to write portable streaming applications and
map them efficiently onto any given architecture. This has the
potential of creating a programming standard for emerging
communication-exposed architectures.  The StreamIt compiler takes a
fist step towards this goal.

