\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related}

The Transputer architecture~\cite{transputer88} shares many
similarities with Raw.  A Transputer system is either an array or a
grid of tiles, where neighbors are interconnected with unbuffered
point-to-point links. The programming language used for the
Transputer, Occam, is a streaming language similar to CSP.  However,
unlike StreamIt filters, Occam concurrent processes are not statically
load-balanced, scheduled and bound to a processor. Occam processes are
run off a very efficient runtime scheduler implemented in
microcode~\cite{may87communicating}.

DSPL, a language with simple filters interconnected in a flat acyclic
graph using unbuffered channels~\cite{Thiel93}.  Unlike the Occam
compiler for the Transputer, the DSPL compiler automatically maps the
graph into the available resouces of the Transputer. The DSPL language
does not expose a cyclic schedule, thus the compiler models the
possible executions of each filter to determine the possible cost of
execution and the volume of communication. It uses a search technique
to map multiple filters onto a single processor for load balancing and
communication reduction. 


The Imagine architecture is specifically designed for the streaming
application domain.  It operates on streams by applying a computation
kernel to multiple data items off the stream register file.  The
compute kernels are written in Kernel-C while the applications
stitching the kernels are written in Stream-C.  Unlike StreamIt, with
Imagine the user has to manually extract the computation kernels that
fit the machine resources in order to get good steady state
performance for the execution of the kernel.  On the other hand,
StreamIt uses fission and fusion transformations to create
load-balanced computation units and filters are replicated to create
more data parallelism when needed.  Furthermore, the StreamIt compiler
is able to use global knowledge of the program for layout and
transformations at compile-time while Stream-C interprets each basic
block at runtime and performs local optimizations such as stream
register allocation in order to map the current set of stream
computations onto Imagine.

% 
% mention iWarp?  Is Mike Taylor writing a section?
%
