Installing the StreamIt Snapshot
--------------------------------

This is for the March 14, 2003 snapshot release (streamit-0.0.20030314).

$Id: INSTALL,v 1.2 2003-03-12 22:41:12 dmaze Exp $


Unpack the StreamIt source tar file somewhere; this can be in your
home directory, or in a shared directory.  Perform the steps listed in
"per-user setup" below, then log out and log in again (or reload your
shell's dotfiles).  If you have the source release, run:

  cd $STREAMIT_HOME/compiler
  make

If you have either the source or compiler binary release, run:

  cd $STREAMIT_HOME/library/c
  make

You should now be able to run the compiler.  For a minimal test:

  cd
  cp $STREAMIT_HOME/apps/examples/hello/HelloWorld6.str .
  knit HelloWorld6.str
  ./a.out -i10

This should print the numbers 0 through 9, in order.  With the Java
library release, running 'knit' should produce an infinite number of
outputs, but you can run 'java HelloWorld6 -i10' afterwards to produce
fewer outputs.


PER-USER SETUP: depends on the shell you use; you need to set the
STREAMIT_HOME environment variable and search paths for Java and
LaTeX.  If you use bash, add to your .bashrc file

  export STREAMIT_HOME=$HOME/streamit-0.0.20030314 # or elsewhere

If you use tcsh, add to your .cshrc file

  setenv STREAMIT_HOME ${HOME}/streamit-0.0.20030314

SOURCE RELEASE: The release comes with provided dotfiles that set up
all of the possible environment variables.  Note that the settings in
these files as distributed contain some paths specific to the MIT LCS
CAG local infrastructure.  You may want to edit these files to set
some of the paths to directories more appropriate to your site.
If you use bash, add to your .bashrc file

  . $STREAMIT_HOME/include/dot-bashrc

If you use tcsh, add to your .cshrc file

  source ${STREAMIT_HOME}/include/dot-cshrc

If you want to override the settings the provided scripts set (for
example, the RAW StarSearch directory), set the relevant variables
after reading the dot-bashrc or dot-cshrc file.

BINARY RELEASE: Add the StreamIt jar file to your Java CLASSPATH.  If
you use bash, add to your .bashrc file

  CLASSPATH=$CLASSPATH:$STREAMIT_HOME/streamit.jar

If you use tcsh, add to your .cshrc file

  setenv CLASSPATH ${CLASSPATH}:${STREAMIT_HOME}/streamit.jar

You may also need to add $STREAMIT_HOME/include/tex to the TEXINPUTS
environment variable to rebuild some of the documentation.  That
variable should have a trailing colon to pick up the default search
directories for LaTeX.

LIBRARY RELEASE: Follow the instructions above under "Binary Release",
but use streamit-lib.jar rather than streamit.jar.


Local variables:
mode: text
End:
